Koyaanisqatsi
Yesterday, I watched a movie with my girlfriend that I'm not even sure I can properly pronounce the name of, and I wanted to share my thoughts on the experience.

First of all, I want to mention that I'm not typically one to watch these kinds of "artistic" movies. The closest thing I've ever watched is probably *2001: A Space Odyssey*, and really, that's nothing like this movie. It would be an understatement to say that my girlfriend has introduced me to movies that I never would have watched on my own, but of course I consider that a good thing.

If you've never seen the movie for yourself, the best way I can describe the movie is by saying that it's a documentary, but those who have seen it will know that's not quite accurate. For one thing, the movie has no spoken dialogue at all. The entire movie consists of video clips and musical pieces (which are excellent, I might point out). The only time the movie speaks directly towards the audience is at the end, but I'll touch more on that later on.

The clips that are included in the movie vary in their subject matter. At the beginning of the movie, most of the clips portray nature scenes that, as someone from Utah, were actually pretty familiar to me--a lot of red rocks and canyons. As the movie progresses, we start to see more and more of humanity creep onto the scene. We see huge parking lots full of cars packed tightly together, which is then followed by a huge parking lot of tanks packed tightly together. To be honest, I have no idea where they would get a shot like that; it's crazy to imagine that there are (or were) that many tanks in the same location.

The majority of the clips, however, come from busy cities and the workplaces of the people that live in the cities. There are so many scenes of traffic, people navigating the subways, and people crowding around in malls. Some of my favorite sections consisted of footage of assembly lines, where they would show time-lapsed footage of factory workers carrying out their day-to-day. This might sound kind of silly, but I also really enjoyed a couple scenes in which the movie had time-lapsed footage of people in an arcade. It's quite something to watch people playing entire levels of Pac-Man in a couple seconds!

Perhaps I'm tipping my hand a bit early here, but the whole time I was expecting the movie to turn sour or critical towards the humanity on display. I was expecting all this hustle-and-bustle to be juxtaposed with starving children, shots of war and violence, or at least natural disasters. However, it didn't really come. As far as I can remember, the rows and rows of tanks at the beginning were the only hint at war, and at that point it felt more like a spectacle than a commentary, especially because of the music.

Speaking of the music, I enjoyed it quite a lot. Philip Glass did the score for this movie and while it was different, it was quite nice to listen to. Now, I haven't confirmed this, but I swear that throughout the hour-and-twenty-minute runtime, there were only about three pieces of music. The one piece that plays over the footage of city life seems to go on for at least 40 minutes. I was seriously impressed with how long some of the tracks felt, and yet they never really got tiring. I'm not super knowledgeable when it comes to music, but I noticed that some of the pieces also had interesting elements to them, like time signatures that you don't hear too often. I could definitely listen to this soundtrack in the future, detached from the film.

Getting back to the film, I do want to comment on the ending. Above, I mentioned a lot of the scenes that I enjoyed during the city-life portion of the movie, but for the most part these scenes were just enjoyable to watch. To me at least, nothing seemed to really have anything to say other than "humans are busy creatures and we make a lot of stuff." However, one of the last scenes of the movie is (what I believe to be) the launching and subsequent explosion of the Challenger rocket. While an impacting scene on its own, the thing that ended up getting to me was just how long the shot *lingered*. I am not exaggerating when I say that for about five minutes the shot tracks one of the rocket engines as it plummets back to Earth, on fire and spinning wildly.

While watching this, I had a few thoughts occur to me, and I will be honest and say that I even got a bit emotional. As a race, we humans have been able to do some pretty extraordinary things. We've been able to build massive cities with staggering infrastructure, we've been able to dive deep into the sea (though not all the way to the bottom in some parts), and we've been able to reach up into space and touch the moon. Even after all this, however, we are still faced with plenty of humbling setbacks. The worst part is that those setbacks are usually caused by us. The Challenger rocket explosion was the result of a few small mistakes culminating in a tragedy. How many other times have we halted our progression or set ourselves back because of mistakes and errors in judgement? Both as humanity and individuals.

Not content to leave us with just images, the movie finally speaks to us. We are given two slides of text. The first one gives us definitions of the word "koyaanisqatsi." Apparently, this is a Hopi word meaning:</p>
<blockquote>"crazy life," "life in turmoil," "life out of balance," "life disintegrating," "a state of life that calls for another way of living."</blockquote>
<p>The second slide translates the chanting that was heard during the duration of the final music track of the movie. It turns out the chanting was three Hopi prophecies:
- "If we dig precious things from the land, we will invite disaster."
- "Near the Day of Purification, there will be cobwebs spun back and forth in the sky."
- "A container of ashes might one day be thrown from the sky, which could burn the land and boil the oceans."
These lines of text serve to recontextualize the whole movie. It seems that the movie was going to end up at the "humans can be bad" position, it just took the entire movie to get there. Of course, there's more to it than that, and perhaps the film could've been more critical throughout if that was the point it wanted to make, but from what I understand, it was pretty revolutionary at the time.

Anyway, I'm glad that my girlfriend suggested that we watch this movie. Apparently, there is a sequel, and I look forward to watching that, too.