"Games as a Service" Pricing Models
2025/01/30
I've been playing Andrew Gower's [Brighter Shores](https://www.brightershores.com/) since its release back in November. I've actually wanted to write a blog post or make a video about the game for a while now, but I just haven't yet been able to formulate my thoughts in a way I'm satisfied with. So, this isn't that post.

What this post is actually about is how the expectations for the pricing models of live service games seem to have shifted over the thirty-five years that I've been alive. When I say, "live service games," I'm specifically referring to games that receive consistent and fairly frequent updates and attention from their developers. This can range from games like Fortnite or Helldivers to RuneScape or World of Warcraft. Brighter Shores would also be covered under this definition.

Anyways, over the past couple months, I've seen multiple posts pop up with people criticizing the game's choice to implement a monthly subscription to access content past a certain point. While some of the posts are, understandably, asking why a game that's in Early Access is locking content behind a paywall, the majority of posts are asking why there's a paywall at all.

It seems as though the modern gamer has become accustomed to the "free-to-play" monetization model. While that reads like an oxymoron, I will elaborate. The free-to-play model is one that a lot of live service games utilize; the idea is that you can play the game, pretty much unrestricted, for free. The way the developer/publisher/whoever makes their money is by offering in-game purchases. These purchases can be as innocuous as a cosmetic skin for their weapon or character, or as balance-damaging as a power or experience boost (typically referred to as "pay-to-win"). There are also other ways that "free-to-play" gamers are milked for their money, but I'll mention those later on.

The thing is the term "free-to-play" (I'm going to refer to it by its common abbreviation of F2P from now on) hasn't always meant what it does now. For the online games that I played growing up, F2P almost always referred to a portion of the game that you could try out for free. The rest of the game would be locked behind a monthly subscription. Even games like World of Warcraft or Lord of the Rings Online, where you had to purchase expansions separately, would still require you to pay the monthly subscription in order to play past the F2P portion of the game.

The F2P paywall could take many different forms. In some games, like Lord of the Rings Online, the F2P trial was actually time limited. If I remember correctly, you could only play for ten days before you were locked out of your account and forced to pay to continue. Most games at the time though, like RuneScape, Toontown Online, or Wizard101, would allow you to play the game indefinitely, but you would hit a "paywall" where you could not progress through a zone or the story without paying the monthly subscription. This is the approach that Brighter Shores takes.

In Brighter Shores, you can play through about half the game before you are required to pay to progress. Of course, as more content releases, the percentage of the game that is currently F2P will decrease, but the amount of content that F2P players will have access to won't change (at least there has been no indication that it will from Andrew or the team).

And let me say, the content on offer is quite substantial. I was able to play the entire first month after the game's release without paying the monthly subscription. I did progress the main story quest up to the point where the trial ended, but there was still so much that I could go back and do. Even now, I'm still nowhere near to completing the F2P episodes of the game, much less the pay-to-play content that I now have access to.

However, I'm not writing this post to argue whether Brighter Shores has a good trial. (Although for the record, I think it does. You could play for hundreds of hours without paying a dollar.) The purpose of this post is merely to reflect on how F2P and the expectations of F2P players have changed over the years.

One more thing that I think is interesting to point out is that the modern F2P player is no stranger to monthly subscription costs for playing games. This is why it's so surprising to me to see posts criticizing Andrew's choice for using the monthly subscription model to monetize his game. Again, it might be a bit silly seeing "monthly subscription" and "F2P" in the same sentence, but what I'm referring to is known in the gaming industry as "Battle pass."

I cannot say from where Battle passes originated, but I am pretty confident in saying that Fortnite made them popular. The idea is that once a month (or however long the "seasons" of the game last), you pay a certain amount to gain access to a special progression path. This progression path will reward players for playing the game during the season, and rewards usually consist of cosmetic unlocks or, in some games, power boosts. So while you aren't locked out of playing portions of the game if you don't pay, at best you're being locked out of cosmetic items (and receiving ridicule from your peers for being a "default skin"), and at worst you're losing out on power (going back to the idea of pay-to-win).

One of the stupidest things about battle passes, and the reason I will never buy one, is that in the majority of games (with very few exceptions), battle passes can only be progressed during a single season. Once the season is over, the battle pass is replaced with the next one. This means that if you didn't play enough to progress far enough during the season, you miss out on unlocks *that you paid for.* Maybe this isn't a problem for people that get addicted to and can stick with a single game for months at a time, but I know that for me this would be nightmare. I can usually only play a game for about a month and a half before I need to rotate to another one for a while. I just cannot understand why the modern gamer would support this monetization model.

But, regardless of whether I understand it or not, it seems to be working, as many games have adopted this monetization strategy. For me though, if I have the choice between paying a monthly subscription or having to deal with some of the monetization strategies of modern games, I'll gladly take the former.